Sphere of values (assessments) and norms
(rules) regulating life from the standpoint of humanism, goodness and justice


In the row below, find a concept that is generalizing for all other concepts presented. Write this word down.
Profit, income, salary, interest, rent.


Below is a list of characteristics. All of them, with the exception of two, relate to the characteristics of a state of any type.
1) sovereignty; 2) the presence of a certain territory; 3) priority of human rights and freedoms; 4) the right to establish and collect taxes; 5) public nature of power; 6) establishment and implementation of the principle of separation of powers.
Find two characteristics that “fall out” from the general series and write down the numbers under which they are indicated in the table.


Choose the correct judgments about the person and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) The sequence of the main stages of human life, in which childhood is replaced by maturity, and then old age sets in, is biologically determined.
2) The formation of a person as an individual is associated with the acquisition of social traits and qualities.
3) A person inherits moral standards.
4) The influence of genetic factors on the development of a person’s abilities serves as an expression of his social essence.
5) A person’s natural predisposition to certain types of activity is manifested in social circumstances.



Country Z is undergoing education reform. What facts indicate that the reform is aimed at humanizing education? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) increase in the number of educational subjects
2) reducing the time spent studying natural sciences
3) focus on the interests and inclinations of the student
4) use of health-saving technologies
5) paying special attention to moral education
6) computerization of the educational process



Select the correct statements about the distinctive features of a market economy and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) The state carries out centralized distribution of resources.
2) Prices for goods and services are determined by the relationship between supply and demand.
3) Enterprises have to solve the problem of limited resources.
 
A) development of high technologies B) mechanization of industrial
production
C) highlighting the service sector D) subsistence nature of the economy
D) communal way of life, collectivism
 
1) traditional (agrarian)
2) industrial
3) informational
(post-industrial)
 
4) Producers of goods and services compete for consumer demand.
5) Everyone has the right to freely dispose of their abilities and property for entrepreneurial and other economic activities not prohibited by law.

 
Establish a correspondence between the examples and the types of costs of the company in the short term: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF COSTS
 
The graph shows the change in the supply of passenger cars in the consumer market: the supply curve has moved from position S to position S1. (On the graph P is the price of the product;
 
A) administration salaries
B) piecework wages for hired workers
C) rent for premises D) purchase of raw materials
D) interest on loans
 
1) constant
2) variables
 
Which of the following factors could cause this change? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) increase in the number of car manufacturers
 

The owners of the Solnyshko company are planning to expand their enterprise. Which of the following can they use as sources of business financing? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) attracting loans
2) tax deductions
3) increasing labor productivity
4) profit from sales of the enterprise’s products
5) improvement of production technologies
6) issue and placement of shares of the enterprise Answer:
 
2) lowering the age for obtaining a driver's license
3) reduction in prices for components for cars
4) increase in electricity tariffs
5) increasing interest on car loans Answer: .


Choose the correct judgments about social stratification and write down
the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) The concept of “social stratification” refers to any changes occurring in society.
2) Social stratification involves dividing society into social strata by combining different social positions with approximately the same social status.
3) Sociologists identify the following criteria for social stratification: income, power.
4) Social stratification involves the allocation of social layers depending on the personal qualities of a person.
5) The prestige of a profession as a criterion of social stratification is associated with social attractiveness, respectful attitude in society towards one or another profession, position, or occupation.
 
During a sociological survey of 23-year-old working boys and girls from country Z, they were asked the question: “Why do you work, what is your work motivation?” The results obtained (as a percentage of the number of respondents) are presented in the form of a diagram.
 
Choose the correct judgments about political leadership and write down the numbers
under which they are indicated.
1) The charismatic type of political leadership includes leaders who, in the opinion of other people, are endowed with special outstanding qualities.
2) The authoritarian style is characterized by the fact that the leader, while performing his functions, always takes into account the opinions of his followers and develops their creative attitude to the matter.
3) Based on the method of legitimation, authorities distinguish between legal (rational)
legal), traditional and charismatic types of leadership.
4) Political leadership is the stable, priority and legitimate influence of one or more persons exercising power functions on society.
5) Any political leader is necessarily the leader of the party. Answer:	.


Establish a correspondence between the functions and the subjects of state power of the Russian Federation that perform them: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
 
 
1) Half of the young men work in order to ensure material well-being for themselves and their family.
2) The proportions of girls who connect work motivation with the need for self-realization and the opportunity to travel and communicate with different people are equal.
3) The share of those who work because they are interested in what they do is higher among girls than among boys.
 
A) approval of changes in borders between constituent entities of the Russian Federation
B) management of federal property C) appointment to the position of Chairman
Central Bank of the Russian Federation
D) development of the federal budget E) implementation of pardons
 
1) President of the Russian Federation
2) Federation Council
3) State Duma
4) Government of the Russian Federation
 
4) Equal shares of respondents in each group make efforts to climb the career ladder.
5) A larger proportion of boys, compared to girls, work because their work is very necessary for society.

 
The Constitution of Country Z proclaims it to be a democratic federal state with a republican form of government.
Which of the following features characterize the form of state (territorial) structure of country Z? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) regular elections of the head of state and parliament on an alternative basis
2) bicameral structure of parliament, ensuring regional representation
3) inclusion in the state of several state entities, each of which has its own specific competence
4) the effect of the constitutions of the subjects under the supremacy of the general constitution
5) the presence of real political and social rights and freedoms of citizens
6) political pluralism

Choose the correct judgments about the Russian legal system and write down the numbers,
under which they are indicated.
1) Branches of substantive law, in contrast to branches of procedural law, establish the procedure for applying legal norms.
2) Criminal law regulates social relations related to the commission of criminal acts, the imposition of punishment and the application of other measures of a criminal legal nature.
3) Administrative law regulates property and related personal non-property relations.
4) Civil law is classified as private law.
5) A legal institution is a set of norms regulating a certain segment (side) of homogeneous social relations.

Establish a correspondence between actions and elements of taxpayer status in the Russian Federation: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
ACTIONS ELEMENTS OF TAXPAYER STATUS
 
Which of the following refers to the constitutional duties of a citizen of the Russian Federation? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) indicating your nationality
2) preservation of historical and cultural heritage
3) participation in elections of government bodies
4) paying taxes
5) free disposal of one’s ability to work Answer: .
 
A) demand compliance and preservation of tax secrecy
B) be present during an on-site tax audit
C) pay legally established taxes and fees
D) comply with the legal requirements of the tax authority to eliminate identified violations of the legislation on taxes and fees
D) receive at your place of registration
from tax authorities free information on current taxes and fees
 
1) rights
2) responsibilities

 
Auto mechanic Roman found a new job in his specialty. To conclude an employment contract, he brought military registration documents and a work book. What else, according to the Labor Code of the Russian Federation, must Roman present to the employer? Write down the numbers under which the relevant documents are indicated.
1) certificate of registration of ownership of residential premises
2) insurance certificate of state pension insurance
3) passport of a citizen of the Russian Federation
4) tax notice
5) diploma of specialized education
6) an extract from the financial and personal account Answer: .
Read the text below, in which a number of words are missing. Select from the list provided the words that need to be inserted in place of the gaps.
“Motive (A) is what motivates it, for the sake of which it is carried out. The incentive is usually a specific
  (B), which is satisfied in the course and through the activity. This is a certain form of communication between living organisms and the outside world, necessary for the existence of (B), a social group, and society as a whole.
  (D) needs are caused by the biological nature of man. These are the needs of people for everything that is necessary for their existence, development and reproduction. (D) needs are related to the fact that a person belongs to society, occupies a certain place in it, participates in work activities and communication with other people.
  (E) needs are associated with a person’s knowledge of the world around him, his place in it and the meaning of his existence. Each of the needs groups corresponds to a specific type of activity.”
The words in the list are given in the nominative case. Each word can only be used once.
Choose one word after another, mentally filling in each gap. Please note that there are more words in the list than you will need to fill in the blanks.
 

List of terms:
1) need
2) activity
3) nature
4) social
5) natural
6) genuine (reasonable)
7) individuality
8) individual
9) ideal (spiritual)
The table below shows the letters representing the missing words. Write down the number of the word you chose in the table under each letter.


The use of resources to satisfy needs is subordinated to the economic goals that individuals (households), firms and society as a whole pursue in their economic activities. Modern economic theory is based on the rational behavior of economic entities when choosing the goals of their economic activities. In reality, this means striving to maximize results for given costs. The economic goal of the consumer is to maximize the satisfaction of all his needs, i.e. maximizing the utility function. Utility maximization depends not only on current consumption, but also on savings made in accordance with price movements. The economic goal of the company is to maximize profits or minimize production costs. For this, not only prices are used, but also advertising, design, changes in inventory, etc.
The main economic goals of modern society are economic growth, increased production efficiency, full employment and socio-economic stability.
Economic growth... should be achieved not through environmental degradation, but through increasing the efficiency of using old resources and involving new ones in the production process...
A market economy guarantees, first of all, consumer freedom, which is expressed in freedom of consumer choice in the market for goods and services. Voluntary, non-coercive exchange becomes a necessary condition for consumer sovereignty. Everyone independently distributes their resources in accordance with their interests and, if desired, can independently organize the process of production of goods and services on a scale that allows their abilities and available capital. This means that there is freedom of enterprise. The individual himself determines what, how and for whom to produce, where, how, to whom, how much and at what price to sell the produced products, how and on what to spend the proceeds. Therefore, economic freedom presupposes economic responsibility and is based on it...
Economic freedom is the foundation and integral part of the freedoms of civil society. It acts primarily as a necessary means of achieving political freedom; in turn, political freedom is a guarantor of economic freedom. In a free society the individual
 
(R.M. Nureyev)
How does the text reveal the essence of rational behavior of economic entities? What, according to the author, are the main economic goals of modern society? (Name any three goals.) How does the author understand free enterprise?


Based on your knowledge of the social science course, explain the meaning of the concept
"economic responsibility". How does the author describe the firm's economic purpose? What means of achieving this goal are mentioned in the text? (Name any three means.)


What two possible sources (paths) of economic growth are mentioned in the text? Give two examples illustrating each of these sources (paths). (Cite the source (path) first, then give examples that illustrate it.)


The author writes that the classical market economy is based on the limited role of government intervention in the economy. Based on the text and social science knowledge, name and briefly explain any three functions of the state in a market economy.
 


What meaning do social scientists give to the concept of “legal responsibility”? Using knowledge from a social science course, make two sentences: one sentence containing information about the types of disciplinary sanctions in the Labor Code of the Russian Federation, and one sentence revealing the essence of the principle of humanism of legal responsibility.

Name and illustrate with examples any three functions of general education. (Each example must be formulated in detail.)

The code of customary law of medieval France stated: “It should be known that the people of our century know three states. The first is noble. The second is the state of people who are free by origin, born of a free mother. The third is the serfdom of people. There is a big difference between the rights of nobles and other people.”
What sphere of public life is reflected in these legal provisions? What historical type of stratification is recorded by these norms? Using social science knowledge, indicate any three criteria for the stratification of modern society.


You are instructed to prepare a detailed answer on the topic “Political Parties”. Make a plan according to which you will cover this topic. The plan must contain at least three points, of which two or more are detailed in subparagraphs.
 


Choose one of the statements below and write a mini-essay based on it.
Identify, at your discretion, one or more main ideas of the topic raised by the author and expand on it (them).
When revealing the main idea(s) you have identified, in your reasoning and conclusions, use social science knowledge (relevant concepts, theoretical positions), illustrating them with facts and examples from public life and personal social experience, examples from others educational subjects.
To illustrate the theoretical positions, reasoning and conclusions you have formulated, please provide at least two facts/examples from various sources. Each given fact/example must be formulated in detail and clearly related to the illustrated position, reasoning, and conclusion.

All our theories are nothing more than a generalization of experience and observed facts.” (V.A. Ambartsumyan)
“Supply and demand are a process of mutual adjustment and coordination.” (P.T. Heine)
“The beginning of personality comes much later than the beginning of the individual.” (B.G. Ananyev)
“Divide and conquer is a wise rule, but
“unite and direct” is even better.” (I.V. Goethe)
“The law does not know class crimes, does not know differences in the circle of persons among whom its violation is committed. He is equally strict and equally merciful to everyone.” (A.F. Koni)
 
