Below is a list of signs. All of them, with the exception of two, characterize the dynamic nature of society.
1) connection with nature; 2) changes in social relations; 3) social mobility; 4) abolition of outdated norms; 5) improvement of social organization; 6) the presence of social institutions.
 
  
Choose the correct judgments about the person and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) The sequence of stages of a person’s life, in which childhood
  gives way to youth, youth to maturity, and then comes old age, biologically determined.
2) The formation of a person as an individual is associated with the acquisition of social traits and qualities.
3) A person inherits moral standards.
4) The influence of genetic factors on the development of a person’s abilities serves as an expression of his social essence.
5) A person’s natural predisposition to certain types of activity is manifested in social circumstances.

Choose the correct statements about financial institutions and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) Commercial banks are engaged in the production of wealth, trade and property insurance.
2) Mutual investment funds pool funds for joint
 
A) observation B) experiment
B) description of the object
D) explanation of existing relationships E) formulation of patterns
 
1) empirical
2) theoretical
 
acquisition of assets and sharing of associated risks, profits or losses.
3) The purpose of the Bank of Russia is to protect and ensure the stability of the ruble.
4) The Bank of Russia exercises supervision over the activities of credit
 
Write down the selected numbers in the table under the corresponding letters. Answer:
 
organizations and banking groups.
5) Commercial banks issue money. Answer:	.
 


 
One of the television channels shot a multi-part film about the life of several generations of one family. Which of the following allows us to classify this series as a work of mass culture? Write down the numbers under which the characteristics of works of popular culture are indicated.
1) orientation to the tastes and needs of a narrow circle of connoisseurs and connoisseurs
2) the use of folk music and epic stories in the film
 
Establish a correspondence between the examples and types of taxes and fees according to the Tax Code of the Russian Federation: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF TAXES
AND FEES IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
 
3) based on average consumer taste
4) promotion of traditional family values that are understandable to most viewers
5) the filmmakers fully realize their needs for self-expression, expressing views that are not shared by the majority
6) positioning the film as a product for recreation and entertainment
 
A) fees for the use of wildlife objects
B) personal income tax C) water tax
D) trade fee
D) transport tax
 
1) federal
2) local
3) regional
 
 
The company "Lisichka" is an atelier specializing in sewing school uniforms. Find in the list below examples of fixed costs of the Lisichka company in the short term and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) payment for consumed electricity
2) purchase of fabrics, threads, accessories
3) payment of piecework wages to employees
4) premiums for insurance of company property
5) administration salaries
6) repayment of interest on a previously taken loan.

Choose the correct statements about social stratification and social mobility and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) Horizontal mobility involves moving to a social group located at a different level of the social hierarchy.
2) Personal qualities of a person act as a criterion for the social stratification of modern society.
3) One of the criteria for differentiating social groups is income.
4) Sociologists distinguish between individual and group mobility.
5) One of the criteria for the social stratification of society is access to power.


 

During a sociological survey of working boys and girls from country Z, they were asked the question: “Why do you work, what is your work motivation?”

Find in the list below the conclusions that can be drawn from the diagram and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) Half of the young men work in order to ensure material well-being for themselves and their families.
2) The proportions of girls who connect work motivation with the need for self-realization and the opportunity to travel and communicate with different people are equal.
3) The share of those who work because they are interested in what they do is higher among girls than among boys.
4) Equal shares of respondents in each group make efforts to climb the career ladder.
5) A larger proportion of boys, compared to girls, work because their work is very necessary for society.

 
Select the correct statements about political leadership and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) The charismatic type of political leadership includes leaders who, in the opinion of other people, are endowed with special outstanding qualities.
2) The authoritarian style is characterized by the fact that the leader, while performing his functions, always takes into account the opinions of his followers and develops their creative attitude to the matter.
3) Based on the method of legitimation, authorities distinguish between legal (rational)
legal), traditional and charismatic types of leadership.
4) Political leadership is the stable, priority and legitimate influence of one or more persons exercising power functions on society.
5) Any political leader is necessarily the leader of the party. Answer:	.



In democratic state Z, during the electoral reform
 
Which of the listed positions relate to the fundamentals of the constitutional system of the Russian Federation? Write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) unity of economic space
2) the presence of an official ideology
3) rule of law
4) priority of the judiciary
5) secular state



Establish a correspondence between the powers and the subjects of state power of the Russian Federation exercising these powers: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
POWERS OF RUSSIAN STATE AUTHORITIES
FEDERATION

During parliamentary elections, a transition was made from a proportional electoral system to a majoritarian one.
Which of the following remained unchanged during this electoral reform? Write down the corresponding numbers.
1) the dependence of the number of deputy mandates received by the party on the number of votes
2) free and voluntary participation of citizens in elections
3) the presence of a pre-election campaign stage
 
A) ensuring the execution of the federal budget
B) management of federal property
B) granting pardon
D) approval of military doctrine
D) approval of changes in borders between constituent entities of the Russian Federation
 
1) President
Russian Federation
2) Federation Council
3) Government of the Russian Federation
 
4) the possibility of nominating independent non-party candidates
5) secret voting procedure
6) voting in single-mandate constituencies Answer: .
 
Write down the selected numbers in the table under the corresponding letters. Answer:
 


 
Choose the correct judgments about law enforcement agencies and write down the numbers under which they are indicated.
1) One of the functions of law enforcement agencies is to strengthen law and order.
2) A unified centralized system of federal bodies overseeing the accurate and uniform implementation of laws is called the Bar.
3) Law enforcement agencies can pass relevant laws.
4) The police are tasked with identifying and investigating crimes.
5) During criminal proceedings, the prosecutor supports the state prosecution, ensuring its legality and validity.



Establish a correspondence between examples and types of subjects of civil law in the Russian Federation: for each position given in the first column, select the corresponding position from the second column.
EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF SUBJECTS
 
Alexander, an adult capable citizen of state Z,
decided to become a citizen of the Russian Federation.
Under what conditions can Alexander apply for citizenship of the Russian Federation in the general manner? Write down the numbers under which these conditions are indicated.
1) having a legal source of livelihood
2) the obligation to comply with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and Russian legislation
3) availability of a document on professional education
4) knowledge of Russian language
5) presence of family ties in the Russian Federation
6) the presence of property on the territory of Russia Answer: .




 
A) Chechen Republic
B) citizen of the Russian Federation K.N. Stepanov
B) production cooperative "Mimosa"
D) Rostov region
D) joint stock company "Luch"
 
1) public legal education
2) legal entity
3) individual
 
Write down the selected numbers in the table under the corresponding letters. Answer:

Alexander, an adult capable citizen of state Z,
decided to become a citizen of the Russian Federation.
Under what conditions can Alexander apply for citizenship of the Russian Federation in the general manner? Write down the numbers under which these conditions are indicated.
1) having a legal source of livelihood
2) the obligation to comply with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and Russian legislation
3) availability of a document on professional education
4) knowledge of Russian language
5) presence of family ties in the Russian Federation
6) the presence of property on the territory of Russia Answer: .

Law is a system that consists of a number of elements. These elements include branches of law, as well as legal norms.
The relationship between state and law is actually very complex. Thus, the activities of the state are normally limited by law. In this situation, law is a set of norms valid not only for people, but also for the state as a subject of public life. In other words, the state, like ordinary citizens, can have rights and responsibilities, and if it violates norms, it must be held accountable.
At the same time, opposite relationships are possible between the state and law, when the state is above the law. This situation is quite dangerous, as it can cause arbitrariness towards citizens on the part of the state. At the very least, the state's refusal to act in accordance with legal norms almost always leads to negative consequences, since the majority of citizens begin to realize that the state does not act in accordance with the norms it itself has established.
In fact, both types of relations simultaneously take place between the state and law. At the very least, it is the state that has the right to have the last vote when adopting a particular law; therefore, law is a product of state activity as well. Usually, after a law has been passed, the state obeys it and begins to act in accordance with it. And this already means that law prevails over the state. In a normal case, the state cannot abolish this or that legal norm without resorting to fairly complex procedures, again established by law, that is, it cannot change legal norms arbitrarily.
 
The author writes about the relationship between law and the state. Using
social science knowledge, explain the meaning of the concept of “state”.
(The explanation of the meaning/definition of the concept “state” must indicate at least two essential features. The explanation/definition can be given in one or more common sentences.)



Using social science knowledge and facts of social life, illustrate with examples the actions regulated by three different branches of Russian law.
(In each case, first give an example, then indicate the industry. Each example should be formulated in detail.)



Using social science knowledge, formulate three judgments about the role of law in the life of the state.
(Each judgment must be formulated as a common sentence.)
 

 
The graph shows the change in the situation on the consumer market for passenger cars in country Z. The supply curve has moved from position S to position S1 with constant demand D. (On the graph P is the price of the product; Q is the quantity of the product).
How did the equilibrium price change?
What could cause the change in supply? Indicate any one circumstance (factor) and explain its influence on the proposal.
(The explanation must be given in relation to the market specified in the text of the assignment.)
How will demand and the equilibrium price in this market change if the income of the population increases, all other things being equal?



In country Z, the main processes of production and management are computerized, knowledge-intensive production and means of communication are actively developing. The structure of the economy has a high share of the service sector. The basis of the economy is private property and private economic initiative. The share of the public sector in the country's economy is insignificant.
In the period from 2013 to 2018, there was an increase in the popularity of distance learning; in schools in country Z, the number of classes using Internet technologies increased by 25%. On average, the share of students with access to video lessons and teaching materials increased by 2.5 times. Sociological surveys have established that families of the democratic type predominate in Z.
What type of society is country Z? What type of economic system is country Z? What trend in the development of education does the data illustrate? What features characterize a democratic family? (Give any two characteristics.)
 

The Constitution of the Russian Federation is called a social-value constitution.
Based on the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, provide three confirmations of this characteristic.
(Each confirmation must be formulated as a general proposal based on a specific provision of the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
Please note that correct completion of the task does not require indicating in the answer the numbers of the relevant articles of the Constitution and literal reproduction of their content.)
Using social science knowledge, draw up a complex plan that allows you to essentially reveal the topic “Political Parties”. A complex plan must contain at least three points that directly address the topic in essence, of which two or more are detailed in subparagraphs. (The number of subparagraphs of each detailed paragraph must be at least three, except for cases where, from the point of view of social sciences, only two subparagraphs are possible.)


Justify the need for political diversity and multi-party system in a democratic society. (The rationale may be given in one or more common sentences.)
What political parties operate in the Russian Federation? (Name any three parties.) For each of them, give one example illustrating the implementation of any function of a political party in the life of society and the state. (Each example should be formulated in detail. Taken together, the examples should illustrate three different functions.)

