Recently, digital technologies have been rapidly spreading throughout the world. The Internet, mobile phones and other means of collecting and storing information have a strong impact on economic activity. Almost no economic transactions can now be carried out without digital technologies. Digital technologies allow:
improve products and improve their quality,
reduce costs,
optimize operations to meet the individual needs of consumers,
solve problems of information asymmetry (such as moral hazard and adverse selection),
productivity increase,
flexibility and coordination of economic activities,
and etc.
On the other hand, digital technologies may come with costs that offset some of the efficiency that a firm gains from using this technology.

Provide four different examples of the use of digital technologies in business that demonstrate the achievement of the above results (at least five of the above). Explain how the firm benefits in each example given.
Give two different examples that demonstrate the costs incurred when using digital technologies in business.
 

On his 16th birthday, Nikolai received a long-awaited bicycle worth 21,000 rubles from his parents as a gift. He was happy and spent the whole summer happily riding it through the fields and forests. But then his friend, 18-year-old Oleg, began selling his computer, which he was tired of. Oleg offered Nikolai to buy a cheap computer from him on the condition that he would sometimes give him a bicycle to ride. Nikolai agreed: he paid the money donated by his parents, as well as the money he earned during the summer holidays.
The previous summer, Nikolai worked part-time on the set of a movie in the title role. It was urgent to sign an employment contract, but at that moment Nikolai’s parents were not in town (they were on vacation in Paris) and the contract was signed by his older 20-year-old brother. The filming with Nikolai's participation took place mainly outside the Arctic Circle (even though it was summer, Nikolai was constantly cold and often sick), lasted until midnight, and at the same time Nikolai worked 36 hours a week.
What actions from the point of view of civil law were the parents and Nikolai himself entitled to take? Explain any answer by indicating the necessary conditions for concluding the transactions specified in the problem with the participation of minors.
What violations of the labor legislation of the Russian Federation were committed? Justify your answer.
 

During a break between seminars, first-year students Peter and Pavel argued about how best to conceptualize democracy if they were going to compile a democracy index.
Paul insisted that, of course, democracy includes fair and free elections; After all, in modern political science there is an established opinion that a regime cannot be considered democratic if there is no change of power for three or more election cycles (for example, the ruling party in a parliamentary system). A strong parliament and a weak presidency should also be considered components of true democracy. In addition, the definition of democracy must include respect for the rights and freedoms of citizens.
Peter listened politely to Paul, but kept turning over counterarguments in his mind. When it was his turn to speak, he leaned on the back of his chair and, twirling a pen in his hands, suggested that the index should not include so many signs of democracy: it has certain costs. It would be more productive to adopt the minimalist concept of democracy proposed by Joseph Schumpeter, the essence of which is the presence of separation of powers. He also questioned whether fair and free elections are a component of democracy: Ancient Athens had no election procedure at all, but Athens is considered a democratically governed polis.
The teacher of political science, who was in the classroom between classes, could not help but hear this entire conversation. He noted the rather high level of reasoning of Peter and Paul, but caught himself thinking that they were unlikely to pass the exam very well on his subject: after all, they made quite a few factual errors.
Point out what mistakes Paul and Peter made in their reasoning; in cases where an error can be clearly corrected, make such a correction; in other cases, justify why this or that opinion of your interlocutors is incorrect (give theoretical arguments and/or links to relevant facts).

Two students approached the teacher, who was looking at portraits of famous representatives of ancient Greek culture (see pictures below). One portrait in particular caught his attention
Who is shown in this portrait? - asked the students.
Oh, this is a great man! His name is on the list of people you should know at the end of our course:
Praxiteles, Aristocles, Xenophanes, Themistocrates, Aristotle, Xenophon, Hippocrates, Themistocles, Aristophanes, Hippocles, Xenocrates.
But we haven’t completed the course yet!
No problem, try to guess it yourself. Let's do this: I will tell each of you only one part of the name. And then, exchanging truthful information about your knowledge or ignorance, you must figure out who I wished for.
After this, the teacher whispered the first part of the name into the ear of the first student, and the second - the second.
“I’m sure you and I both don’t know,” said the first, looking at the list of names.
“You’re right, I really don’t know,” answered the second.
Even after my first remark? – the first one was surprised.
Even after it,” the second confirmed after thinking.
Great! In that case, thanks to your words, I already know the answer! - exclaimed the first.
Wait a minute... Yeah, now I guessed it too! - answered the second one.
What name was guessed?
What portrait was the teacher looking at?
What is this person known for in the history of philosophy (give at least one characteristic fact about him).
 
