Most of us would probably agree that respect for others does not require us to avoid violating their rights at all costs.” Do you agree with this statement? If not, why not? If so, what price is too high to respect the rights of others? Who should decide this? Which philosophical and ethical teachings would justify the behavior of the tourist from Feinberg’s example, and which would not? Give reasons for your answers.
“Unfortunately, it would be too difficult for independent market actors to coordinate the implementation of such an agreement. Any such attempt would face a number of obstacles, from the high negotiation costs of such an agreement to the inevitable incentive to violate its terms.” Do you agree with this statement? Using basic concepts from economics and game theory, explain why, in such a situation, actors would have a strong incentive to break the convention, even if it ultimately benefits everyone. Isn't strict government regulation the only way out of such situations? Give reasons for your answer.
“National differences in perceptions, capabilities and goals [of addressing global problems] influence decision-making in the international political arena.” Do you agree with this statement? Give examples of global problems, other than climate change, in which it is difficult for sovereign states to agree on a system of concerted action. Using the concepts of political science, describe the reasons for the opportunistic behavior of subjects of international politics and possible prospects for overcoming them.
“It seems unfair that members of some social groups will be deprived of the opportunity to integrate into the society in which they grew up due to changes in the material environment.” Do you agree with this statement? What will happen to the social structure of those societies that will suffer the most from global climate change? Assess the role of horizontal and vertical mobility for the transformation of social and economic subsystems of society. How is the age and gender (sex) structure expected to change in these societies? Give reasons for your answers.
“If I have the right to something, then I cannot be deprived of it due to the influence of other moral subjects, except in cases where the owner of the rights has undertaken one or another act of aggression. Therefore, if someone attacks us, we have reason to take actions against the attacker that would be unacceptable in any other situation. As a rule, you are not allowed to kill people, but if I attacked you with a knife, you are allowed to kill me.” Can the rights and freedoms of man and citizen be limited according to the Constitution of the Russian Federation? If yes, to achieve what goals? Name the circumstances enshrined in the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation that exclude criminality of acts. Give them a brief description. Which of these apply to the situation described in the quote above? Justify your conclusion.
“The most important thing for libertarians is to find the optimal balance between these two theses.” How do you see this balance? Write a general conclusion summarizing your position on the main problem of this text and your attitude to the author’s reasoning. The conclusion should not contain new arguments - just show, using social science concepts, how the arguments you previously expressed on each issue line up into a single semantic line and where this line leads. How can you summarize your analysis in one sentence? Write this sentence at the end of the work and underline it.

Dan C Sheikhar
Climate change and justice (fragment)
Mainstream narratives portray global climate change as a consequence of the systemic failure of the free market—its failure to produce desired environmental, economic, and social outcomes. For most individuals, the personal benefits of, say, traveling by car instead of the bus more than offset any harm from their own small contribution to climate change. Accordingly, personal interests motivate them to drive rather than use public transport. But the more cars on the road, the more greenhouse gases are released into the atmosphere, which contribute to climate change. As Garrett Hardin noted in his famous article, “As long as we behave merely as independent, rational, free entrepreneurs, the system itself encourages us to ‘foul our own nest’” (Hardin 1968: 1245). The authors of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report take a similar view, characterizing individual contributions to climate change as international externalities and the sustainability of the global climate system as an international “public good.”
To mitigate global climate change, certain interests will have to be sacrificed, and the corresponding actions of individuals will be nullified unless others follow their example. Therefore, it would be logical to assume that in the absence of some kind of international agreement guaranteeing the involvement of the general public in the fight against climate change, many individuals will not take serious steps in this direction. Unfortunately, such an arrangement would be too difficult for independent market actors to coordinate. Any such attempt would face a number of obstacles, from the high negotiation costs of such an agreement to the inevitable incentive to violate its terms.

 
Thus, the most obvious and widely discussed alternative coincides with Hardin's proposals: take legislative action (Hardin 1968: 1247). If we know that, left to our own devices, we will “foul our own nest,” it seems reasonable to develop rules and penalties for violators to protect us from the harmful consequences of our own actions. On this basis, the authors of the IPCC report emphasize that phenomena such as climate change “require the creation of a system with which to solve the problems that arise in connection with them” (Goldemberg et al. 1996: 21). They propose to take the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change as a basis, characterizing it as “a system of collective decision-making by sovereign states.” In doing so, their analysis focuses on “national differences in perceptions, capabilities and goals” that influence decision-making in the international political arena (Arrow et al. 1996: 59, 61).

Many libertarians immediately bristle at any suggestion that the problems posed by climate change can be solved through central planning. They take the following position: since we cannot hope for an “optimal” level of climate stability, the best option
 
is simply to accept a suboptimal state of affairs. And since the free market, they argue, is the most efficient system for allocating resources to meet society's needs, the best way to address climate change is to allow individuals to freely and independently adapt to the phenomenon. As George Reisman notes, “Even if global warming is a fact, free citizens living in an industrial civilization will cope with it without much difficulty: provided, of course, that their ability to harness their energy and engage in production is not paralyzed by environmental organizations and government control.” introduced for other reasons" (Reisman 2007).
Neither the mainstream view nor its libertarian counterpart takes sufficient account of one important factor that is fundamentally central to the libertarian paradigm: most scientists believe that people will suffer as a result of climate change. This fact forces us to expand the scope of a simple discussion of economic efficiency and turn to the ethical side of the matter. When libertarians argue that the right response to climate change is to allow individuals to freely adapt to it, they are implicitly assuming that climate change is not an injustice. Otherwise, creating unlimited opportunities for adaptation would seem insufficient to any libertarian: he would argue for the protection of the rights of victims. But is climate change an injustice?
Libertarian concepts of justice are built around the idea that we should not do certain things to people because some people
- as valuable individuals - cannot be used against the will for the benefit of others (Nozick 1974: 30–31). To treat people simply as resources to be consumed by others is to show them complete disrespect. This view is often expressed through the concept of individual “rights.”
Let us formulate it as follows: if I have the right to something, then I cannot be deprived of it due to the influence of other moral subjects, except in cases where the owner of the rights has undertaken one or another “act of aggression.” Therefore, if someone attacks us, we have reason to take actions against the attacker that would be unacceptable in any other situation. As a rule, you are not allowed to kill people, but if I attacked you with a knife, you are allowed to kill me. However, this time we cannot get rid of examples to the contrary.
Joel Feinberg notes: “Imagine you're hiking in the mountains and you get caught in a snowstorm so bad that your life is in danger. Luckily, you come across an empty hut, locked and boarded up for the winter - that is, clearly someone's property. You break a window, get inside, and wait out the storm for three days. All this time you eat food from the supplies of your unknown benefactor and burn his furniture in the stove to keep the hut warm. Obviously, all these actions of yours are justified, but in doing so you are undoubtedly violating the rights of another person” (Feinberg 1978: 102).

Although in some situations people may be allowed to do things to others that would ordinarily be unacceptable, we are unlikely to be able to determine precisely which cases fall into this category and which do not. Perhaps we can settle on something like this formula: if I have the right to something, then I can’t
 
to be deprived of this through the actions of others in the absence of morally significant reasons for such actions. This formulation seems to correspond to our intuitions about how rights should work in practice. In a normal situation, a tourist should not break into the hut, since it does not belong to him. But the fact that in Feinberg's example the person's life was at risk seems to justify the hack. This conclusion does not mean that the owner of the hut does not have the right to prevent strangers from trespassing on it. On the contrary, it is precisely because of the presence of this right that the tourist requires morally significant reasons to justify his actions.
Most of us would probably agree that respect for others does not require us to avoid violating their rights at all costs. Rather, it is that we should take their rights seriously and only violate them when we can justify our actions on the basis of very compelling reasons (Gaus 2003: 7–10).
The most obvious category of infringements of rights that can be caused by climate change relates to direct damage to individuals and their property from environmental phenomena. One example here is the expected increase in water levels in the World Ocean. An increase in average temperature on the planet can lead to the melting of ice covering part of the land, and at the same time to the expansion of the oceans. As a result, some properties located in coastal areas will be flooded or otherwise damaged. Since these consequences will be a direct result of man-made climate change, we will have the intuition that those who contributed to these events are violating the rights of the individuals who suffer from them.

It might be noted that the climate system is, by definition, subject to significant variations. From this it would seem that the conclusion follows that people do not have the right to preserve certain environmental conditions - after all, there is no “correct” state of the climate; it can always change naturally. I believe, however, that given the analysis of the concept of “right” made above, this argument is untenable.

Another important reason why climate change worries people cannot be left out. It seems unfair that members of some social groups will be deprived of the opportunity to integrate into the society in which they grew up due to changes in the material environment. In many cases, entire peoples will have to leave their homes to survive, and some cultures will disappear completely. Such a prospect cannot but be alarming, but is it tantamount to an infringement of rights?
Let's imagine this hypothetical scenario: a young girl named Akiko, living on one of the Pacific islands, is making plans for the future. She does not yet have any property or profession, so climate change will not cause her economic harm. She is simply considering various options to decide how she should start her adult life. However, the changing environmental situation may deprive her of the opportunity to lead the same lifestyle as her ancestors, and Akiko will have to make appropriate adjustments to her plans for the future.
 
The story turned out to be sad, but there are many cases when people are deprived of the opportunity to lead the life to which traditional culture taught them, but their rights are not violated. For example, small farmers from a village may find themselves in a difficult situation due to the appearance of a large agricultural corporation in their area: due to efficiency and scale, it drives down the prices for the types of products that farmers produce so much that they can no longer afford through its implementation, maintain their traditional way of life. A child from such a village - let's call him Jebediah - at first glance finds himself in the same situation as Akiko. Changed market conditions will not allow him to continue living within the framework of the culture in which he was raised. We do not, however, believe that an agricultural corporation is doing anything improper by marketing its products in larger volumes and at lower prices - although it may not have morally significant reasons for such actions.
It is also worth noting that Akiko's rights are primarily related to the consequences for the entire island people. From a holistic point of view, the community in which Akiko lives is a system of interdependencies, and its "well-being" or
“decline” cannot be perceived simply as the sum of the corresponding effects on individual community members. Climate change damages not only the property of others, but also the strength of the community in which she grew up and wanted and hoped to live. According to our assumptions, the opportunities that Akiko lost were directly related to the well-being of the community as a whole. Therefore, while protesting the loss of opportunities to exist within her native culture, Akiko protests the loss of resilience of her community due to the dysfunction of its members as a result of climate change.
So far we have been talking about the potential attacks on people's rights as a result of the increased threat to the climate system due to climate change. But there is also a time factor. It may seem that a mere time gap between cause and effect is not a parameter due to which we would have to deny that an infringement of rights has occurred. I am certainly violating your right to life by planting a time bomb in your house, no matter what time I set the timer (assuming, of course, that you will not be absent at that moment).
However, we may come to a different conclusion if we consider that those negatively affected by climate change are not necessarily worse off than they would have been without the change. Let's imagine that the consequences of climate change did not become a reality. This means that those who would contribute to this change spend their money on other purposes, travel to other places, choose other jobs. And, more importantly, they meet other people and fall in love under different circumstances.
As Derek Parfit points out in his book Reasons and Men, “Each of us was born from two cells out of millions of the same: the sperm and the egg that it fertilized” (Parfit 1986: 351). If our parents had conceived children under different circumstances (and perhaps even with different partners), other people would have been born instead of us, and we simply would not exist. Parfit notes: “If the choice between two social policy options affects the standard and quality of life of people for a century to come, it will also affect the future life of all members of our society. Thus, some of those who will be born will owe their very existence to this choice of ours. And in a hundred and two hundred years the same can be said about all members of our society.” this phenomenon, defined as the “identity problem,” we get a very unexpected result. If we change the climate, its effects will be felt by people who might not exist if the change had not occurred.
 
Accordingly, because we allow such a change, they simply cannot end up in a worse position than under any other realistically possible scenario for them. The climate in which they will live is a necessary condition for their very existence. Are we infringing on the rights of these people by contributing to climate change? The intuitive answer is likely to be no. Some might point out, however, that even if the consequences of climate change in the strict sense of the word do not make anyone worse off than would otherwise be the case, they will still impose certain costs on future people.
James Woodward, in particular, notes in this regard: “In his memoirs, Man’s Search for Meaning, Viktor Frankl writes that imprisonment in a Nazi concentration camp strengthened his character, allowed him to better understand people and appreciate life more highly. Otherwise he would not have gained such experience. There is reason to believe that the abuse to which he was subjected by the Nazis became a necessary condition for the full life that he led later, and if the Nazis had behaved differently, his future life would not have been so bright and meaningful. However, from this fact alone it clearly does not follow that the Nazis did not act reprehensibly towards Frankl and did not violate his rights” (Ibid., 809).
Above, I examined a number of ways in which climate change might affect people, and several approaches to the question of the moral relevance of these effects in terms of individual rights. I put forward the following thesis: we cannot assume that infringement of rights is always illegitimate - our respect for each other has its limits. Nevertheless, respect for people and their rights is an important element of any sound ethical theory. As part of a more thorough analysis of this issue from a libertarian perspective, finding the optimal balance between these two theses is critical.
