Carefully read the proposed text by David Harvey and study the data given in it. Highlight for yourself the main idea of this text as a whole. Read it again and think about the author's main arguments. The assignment for the text consists of two parts. Start by doing comprehension questions and answering them. At the end of the text there are questions for reasoning - write a detailed, reasoned answer to each of them.

Please note that the assignment contains 6 comprehension questions, 5 reasoning questions for each profile and 1 summary question. The questions are on three separate pages: page 1 contains 6 comprehension questions (questions 1 to 6), page 2 contains reasoning questions (questions 7 to 11), and page 3 contains a summary question (question 12). When you finish working on one page, be sure to move on to the next page.

David Harvey
The Postmodern Condition: A Study of the Origins of Cultural Change trans. Protsenko Nikolay, HSE Publishing House, 2021
(Excerpt)
Since we are faced with a historical transition that is still far from complete and, in any case, like Fordism, certainly partial in a number of important respects, we are faced with a number of theoretical problems. Is it possible to theoretically comprehend logic if there is no very need for this transition? To what extent do past and present theoretical formulations of the dynamics of capitalism need to be modified in the light of the radical reorganizations and restructurings that are taking place in both productive forces and social relations? And is it possible to convincingly represent the existing regime of accumulation in such a way as to find some solution to the question of the direction and consequences of what appears to be a revolution unfolding before our eyes?

The transition from Fordism to flexible accumulation did create serious difficulties for theories of any type. Keynesians, monetarists, neoclassical theorists of unstable market equilibrium seem to be as confused as anyone else.
The transition in question also created significant problems for Marxists. Faced with such difficulties, many commentators have abandoned any claims to theory and simply turned to the pursuit of data to keep pace with rapid changes. However, problems arise here too: which data are key indicators, and not random series? Agreement has been reached on only one point: since about 1970, something important has changed in the very way capitalism operates.

The first difficulty is trying to isolate the nature of the changes we observe. The first, William Halal's rather laudatory account of the new capitalism, emphasizes the positive and liberating elements of the new enterprise. The second is given by Scott Lash and John Urry, and it emphasizes the factors of power relations and politics in relation to economics and culture.
The third, with more detail regarding the transformation of technology and the labor process, is given by Eric Swingedo; in addition, this is a description

contains an assessment of how the accumulation regime and its methods of regulation have changed. Of course, in each case, the above contrasts are used as a didactic tool, emphasizing differences rather than points of continuity; Moreover, none of the named authors claims that the real picture anywhere is as consistent with the patterns as these diagrams suggest.
However, these patterns signal a number of overlaps, as well as some differences that are indicative of the very different causal mechanisms behind them. Halal turns out to be closer to J. Schumpeter's theory of entrepreneurial innovation as the driving force of capitalism and is inclined to interpret Fordism and Keynesianism as unsuccessful interludes in the process
capitalist progress. Lash and Urry view this evolution in part as a collapse of the material conditions for powerful collective working-class politics and seek to assess the economic, cultural, and political origins of this collapse.
By their very use of the terms “organized” and “disorganized” to characterize transition, they emphasize disintegration rather than coherence of modern capitalism, and thereby avoid directly considering the possibility of transition in the regime of accumulation. Swingedo, by emphasizing changes in the mode of production and industrial organization, situates this transition within the framework of mainstream Marxist political economy, while explicitly adopting the language of the regulation school.

Swingedo's interpretation is closer to me, but if the language of the regulation school has been preserved in it better than in others, then this happened, as I suspect, due to a more pragmatic orientation. Within the school of regulation itself, there are no (or almost no) attempts to present any detailed understanding of the mechanism and logic of the transition in question, and this is seen as a serious omission. To bridge this gap requires going back to basics and looking at the logic of capitalism as a whole. In this case, of course, one cannot do without K. Marx, who built a general theory of capitalism by analyzing this formation in the broadly competitive and laissez-faire mode of regulation that existed in Great Britain in the mid-19th century. Let us therefore turn to Marx's "immutable elements and relations" of the capitalist mode of production and consider the extent to which they are omnipresent, despite the later layers of idle talk and ephemerality, fragmentation and disruption of relationships that are so characteristic of today's political economy.

Since flexible accumulation is still a form of capitalism, we can expect that we will have to take into account a number of basic assumptions. I have previously attempted to summarize these assumptions, so I will simply present some of the most significant elements of the argument presented in my book The Limits to Capital. In particular, I will refer to three basic characteristics of any capitalist mode of production: - capitalism is oriented towards growth, the sustainable pace of which is fundamental to the health of the capitalist economic system, since only growth guarantees profits and supports the accumulation of capital. This implies that capitalism has to prepare the ground for the production and growth of real values, and then actually achieve their expansion, regardless of what political, geopolitical or environmental consequences this entails. To the extent that this virtue arises from necessity, it is the cornerstone of the capitalist ideology according to which growth is inevitable and good. A crisis in this case is defined as a lack of growth; the increase in real values is based on the exploitation of living labor in production. This does not mean that labor gets little; rather, growth is always
 
is caused by the gap between what labor receives and what it creates. And it follows from this that control over labor (both in the production process and in sales markets) is fundamentally important for the longest possible preservation of capitalism. In short, capitalism is based on the class relationship between capital and labor. Since labor control is fundamental to capitalist profit, the dynamics of class struggle around the control of labor and market wages are also fundamental to the trajectory of capitalist development; — capitalism is inevitably characterized by technological and organizational dynamics. This happens in part because the coercive laws of competition drive individual capitalists to over-innovate in search of profit. However, organizational and technological changes also play a key role in modifying the dynamics of class struggle, which unfolds from two directions - from the spheres of labor markets and labor control. Moreover, if labor control is fundamental to the production of profits and becomes more widespread and determines the mode of regulation, then technological and organizational innovations in the regulatory system (such as the state apparatus, political systems of incorporation and representation, etc.) turn out to be key moment for the continuation of capitalism.
The ideology that “progress” is inevitable and good stems in part from this necessity. Marx was able to show that these three necessary conditions of the capitalist mode of production were incoherent and contradictory, and therefore the dynamics of capitalism were inevitably subject to crises.


Based on the text, formulate three characteristics of the capitalist mode of production based on its specific ideology.

Can the author be called a follower of Marx? Justify your answer based on the text.

What radical reorganizations and restructurings occurred in social relations with the development of commodity-money relations and the advent of the era of capitalism? Name at least five social phenomena that have undergone transformations and explain the changes that have occurred in them.
Based on the text, formulate three characteristics of the capitalist mode of production based on its specific ideology.

Can the author be called a follower of Marx? Justify your answer based on the text.

What radical reorganizations and restructurings occurred in social relations with the development of commodity-money relations and the advent of the era of capitalism? Name at least five social phenomena that have undergone transformations and explain the changes that have occurred in them.
"Halal appears to be closer to J. Schumpeter's theory of entrepreneurial innovation as the driving force of capitalism and tends to interpret Fordism and Keynesianism as unsuccessful interludes in the process of capitalist progress."
How did J. Schumpeter connect entrepreneurship, market and politics? What criterion of democracy, according to J. Schumpeter, can be considered key?


"There is only one point of agreement: since about 1970, something important has changed in the very way capitalism operates. The first difficulty is trying to isolate the nature of the changes we observe. The first of these is William Halal's rather laudatory description of the new capitalism , emphasizes the positive and liberating elements of new entrepreneurship."
What is meant by entrepreneurial activity in accordance with the Civil Code of the Russian Federation?
 

"Since flexible accumulation is still a form of capitalism, we can expect that we will have to take into account a number of basic assumptions. I have previously tried to summarize these assumptions, so I will simply present some of the most significant elements of the argument presented in my book The Limits to Capital "("Capital Limits")"
Explain the essence of the expression “flexible accumulation” and give an example of “flexible accumulation” in the modern economy


Идеи какой политической идеологии разделяет автор текста? Какие мысли автора могут свидетельствовать об этом? На какой важнейшей категории либерализма заостряет свое внимание автор? (о ней в своё время Л. Мизес «Классический либерализм» писал, что это одно слово, которым можно определить либерализм). Какие еще две важные ценности лежат в основе либерализма?
What political ideology does the author of the text share? What thoughts of the author may indicate this? What most important category of liberalism does the author focus on? (at one time L. Mises wrote about it in “Classical Liberalism” that this is one word that can define liberalism). What two other important values underlie liberalism?

The author argues that because of its focus on economic growth, "capitalism has to prepare the ground for the production and growth of real values, and then actually achieve their expansion, regardless of what political, geopolitical or environmental consequences this entails." Do you agree with this thesis? Why? Give at least two arguments. What positive and negative consequences in the social sphere can an increase in the economic well-being of the population entail? What positive and negative consequences in the social sphere can negative economic growth (recession) entail?


D. Harvey writes: “these three necessary conditions of the capitalist mode of production were incoherent and contradictory, and therefore the dynamics of capitalism are inevitably subject to crises.”
1) Explain what are the incoherence and contradictions of the necessary conditions of the capitalist mode of production? Give at least three relevant arguments.
2) Why, according to the author, “the dynamics of capitalism are inevitably subject to crises”? Give at least three relevant arguments.

"The first, William Halal's rather laudatory account of the new capitalism, emphasizes the positive and liberating elements of the new enterprise. The second, by Scott Lash and John Urry, emphasizes the power relations and politics of economics and culture."
What provisions related to economic activity and the sphere of culture are enshrined in Chapter 2 “Rights and freedoms of man and citizen” of the Constitution of the Russian Federation? Does the Constitution of the Russian Federation provide for any relationship in the regulation of economic activity and the cultural sphere, and if so, how? What is the role of state power in legal regulation in the field of economic and cultural development of the Russian Federation in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation? What changes were made to the Constitution of the Russian Federation, approved during the all-Russian vote on July 1, 2020, relating to economic activity and the cultural sphere?

In the text, the author discusses the key sources of the cultural component of postmodernity. Which ones? How did each of them influence the formation of modern society? Give reasons for your answer. In your opinion, from the author’s point of view, is postmodern society experiencing its ideological crisis? Give reasons for your answer.
Question Summary (15 points)
Write a social science text (conclusion) summarizing your position on the reasoning questions, highlighting the main problem of the text and the relationship to the author’s theses. The conclusion should not contain new arguments - just show, using social science concepts, how the arguments you previously expressed on each issue line up into a single semantic line and where this line leads. At the end of your conclusion, summarize your analysis in one simple sentence. Write this sentence at the end of the work and underline it.
